See also @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/glossary}.

@table @acronym

@item APS
Access Point Sector

@item CBR
Constant Bit Rate. Used in MPEG-1's.

@item CD
Compact Disc

@item CD-DA
@acronym{CD} Digital Audio

@item CD-ROM
@acronym{CD} Read Only Memory

@item CD-ROM XA
CD-ROM EXtended Architecture. A modificattion to the CD-ROM
specification that defines two new types of sectors.  CD-ROM XA was
developed jointly by Sony, Philips, and Microsoft, and its
specifications were published in an extension to the Yellow Book.
CD-i, Photo CD, Video CD and CD-EXTRA have all subsequently been based
on CD-ROM XA.

@item CD-XA
See @acronym{CD-ROM XA}.

@item CVD
Chaoji VCD or China Video Disc @*
@uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/forum/userguides/98177.php}

@item DVD
Digital Versatile Disc  @uref{http://www.dvddemystified.com/dvdfaq.html}

@item DVD-V
@acronym{DVD} for Video.

@item DVD-A
@acronym{DVD} for Audio.

@item FSF
Free Software Foundation, @uref{http://www.fsf.org/}

@item GNU
@acronym{GNU} is not @acronym{UNIX}, @uref{http://www.gnu.org/}

@item LOT
List ID Offset Table.

@item MPEG
Movie Picture Experts Group @uref{http://mpeg.telecomitalialab.com}.
Two sub formats used by Video CD's are MPEG-1 for VCD 1.0, 1.1 and 2.0
and MPEG-2. For SVCD, and HQVCD.

@item NTSC
National Television Standards Committee. The NTSC is responsible for
setting television and video standards in the United.  States

@item OGT
Overlay Graphics & Text. A run-length encoded subtitle format devised
by Philips.

@item PAL
Phase Alternating Line, the dominant television standard in Europe. 

@item PEM
Program End Marker. 

@item PBC
PlayBack Control. 

@item PSD
Play Sequence Descriptor. A section of a Video CD.

@item PVD
Primary Volume Descriptor. A section of a Video CD.

@item RIFF
Resource Interchange File Format. A way to tag multimedia files
developed by Microsoft. Inside a RIFF is a 4-letter character code
(which fits nicely in a 32-bit word) for each type of object called
@acronym{FOURCC}. This idea was taken Electronic Arts which used in
Amigia's @acronym{IFF} (Interchange File Format) and copied by Apple in their 
@acronym{AIFF}.

@item SIF
Source Interchange Format. A video resolution standard.

@item SPI
Segment Play Items.

@item SVCD
Super @acronym{VCD} @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/svcd}

@item VBR
Variable Bit Rate. Used in MPEG-2's

@item VCD
Video @acronym{CD} @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/vcd}

@item XA
See @acronym{CD-ROM XA}

@item XML
eXtensible Markup Language, @uref{http://www.w3.org/XML/}.

@item XSVCD
eXtended @acronym{SVCD}, @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/xvcd.htm}.

@item XVCD
eXtended @acronym{VCD}, @uref{http://www.dvdrhelp.com/xvcd.htm}.

@end table
